is #bigdata finally the answer to end poverty? @lavanyarathnam http://ow.ly/o8gt3 #analytics
interview: xia wang, astrazeneca on #bigdata and the promise of effective healthcare #kdn http://ow.ly/ot2uj
big data is not just for big business. on how #bigdata is being deployed for small businesses: http://bddy.me/1bzukb3 @cxotodayalerts #smb
specifically, list and explain the axioms in detail, compare them in detail to show differences and similarities, advantages and disadvantages,
ways that they lead to the development of the theory of thermodynamics, 
their scientific rigor and consistency  any loopholes? , their capacity to make general thermodynamics understandable,
their capacity to make engineering applied thermodynamics understandable, and other aspects.  when callen, and
earlier his professor tisza  generalized thermodynamics by laszlo tisza, 1966, 
came out with this type of axiomatic approach, there were several published studies about different axiomatic approaches
mostly in physics journals.  these must 
be found and studied, and all publications since then should be found and included in the project.
we also discussed topics such as the importance of in the development of the 
axiomatic approach, the fact that callens postulates do not include the conservation of energy, and that the
laws of thermodynamics do not include reference to equilibrium.
since the development of the steam engine and the start of the industrial revolution, the science
of thermodynamics has rapidly developed into one of the most fundamental disciplines
in the study of engineering. thermodynamics is integral to the design of power plants,
automobiles, and even electronics. since carathedory
first developed the axiomatic approach to thermodynamics in 1909, there has been an abundance of research into this mathematical
formulation since the second half of the 20th century. many
different axioms have been suggested with each leading to alternative methods to derive the theory of thermodynamics. the goal of each approach is to
maximize pedagogical and heuristic value.
in this paper, two of the most prominent approaches to axiomatic thermodynamics were considered callen and tisza gibbsian
thermodynamics  and the modern engineering approach
taken by cengel and boles and moran et al. which is based upon  classical thermodynamics  originally developed by carathedory. for each approach, 
the axioms were stated and described in detail with considerations to their scientific rigor and the way they lead to the development of the theory of thermodynamics. 
comparisons were made on the method s capacity to make thermodynamics 
understandable and conclusions were validated by comparison with peer reviewed articles. it is 
concluded that callen s approach leads to a uniquely elegant formulation of classical 
thermodynamics. it is essentially a physicist s approach that requires a strong understanding of mathematics.
for the student who already has some familiarity with 
thermodynamics, much can be learned from callen s approach. beginners to thermodynamics will favor the modern engineering
approach formulated by cengel and boles and moran et al. this is 
more intuitive as variables and equations are linked to physical 
properties and engineering systems wherever possible. the difference between the two approaches ultimately lies between the axioms that are used. introduction
the word thermodynamics stems from the greek word therme  heat  and dynamis  power   
1. this is descriptive of the early efforts to convert heat into power. the development of 
thermodynamics as a science is closely related to the development of atmospheric steam engines 
and the industrial revolution. the first successful steam engines were built by thomas savery in 1697, and by thomas newcomen in 1712
these engines were slow and inefficient but they created an opening for a new branch of science. 
the science of thermodynamics has since developed into a branch of physics that describes processes in which temperature changes 
play an important role. these processes involve the transformation of energy from one form to 
another or the transfer of energy from one system to another  2 . thermodynamics details the laws that govern such transformations 
and transfers of energy. the scope of thermodynamics is extremely broad, and the derived theory also applies to many other branches of science. thermodynamics describes interactions between 
energy and matter, thus it is hard to imagine an area that 
does not relate to thermodynamics in some form. for this reason, thermodynamics has become one of the most essential parts of an engineering education.
thermodynamics is encountered in almost every engineering system and many aspects of 
life. even the human body is a thermodynamic system. 
we humans can be thought of as very complex combustion engines, which take in fuel 
food  and oxygen to create energy  by atp   1 .
various energy conversions occur in trillions of body cells, all of which are governed by the 
theory of thermodynamics. other applications are more obvious. many household utensils and appliances are designed using the principles of thermodynamics
examples include the heating and air conditioning systems, the refrigerator, the oven, the shower, and even electronics such as 
computers and tvs. most buildings are built with a deliberation of thermodynamics consider insulation, thermal expansion, positioning of windows,
and more complex examples such as skirkanich hall. on a
larger scale, thermodynamics
plays an integral role in the design of power plants, internal combustion engines and jet engines. 
thermodynamics has been used to optimize these designs, increasing efficiency and reducing fuel
consumption and emissions. many feats of engineering would be impossible without the theory of thermodynamics.
before delving into the discussion 
of axiomatic approaches to thermodynamics, it is useful to understand what exactly an axiom is 
in respect to thermodynamics. most frequently, the axioms of thermodynamics are known as the laws of thermodynamics. an axiom can be defined as a 
statement or proposition that is considered as being accepted, established, or self evidently true. 
an axiomatic system is a group of statements that are the starting elements of a mathematical 
project such as the theory of thermodynamics  3 . in respect to thermodynamics, axioms are 
treated as mathematical propositions that are accepted without proofs.
they can be geometric, logical, and arithmetic. the word  postulate  can also be used as a 
synonym for axiom. it is essential to note that the axioms  postulates or laws  of thermodynamics cannot be directly and completely verified by suitable experiments. The
accuracy of the axioms of thermodynamics is proven by inference. that is, the theory that has 
been derived from these axioms has yet to be disproved by experiment  4 . the principles 
embodied in the axioms
of thermodynamics and the theory that is derived from them influence many engineering systems and appliances.
almost every engineering student has heard of the zeroth, first, second and third law of 
thermodynamics. however, most are unaware that these are not the only axioms that can  and 
have been  used to develop the theory of thermodynamics. this paper aims to describe the 
background to axiomatic thermodynamics and then compare and contrast two different sets of 
axioms. this comparison will compare the scientific rigor of the axioms and their capacity to 
make thermodynamics understandable. 
no paper has been published with the sole purpose of comparing these two popular 
approaches in such detail. furthermore, 
there has been very few papers published that aim to review axioms without attempting to define novel formulations. 
the first axioms of thermodynamics emerged in the 1850s. 
these axioms ultimately became known as the first and second laws of thermodynamics and were derived by the works of william rankine, lord kelvin
and rudolph clausius. lord kelvin first used the term
thermodynamics in a publication in 1849, and william 
rankine wrote the first textbook on thermodynamics in 1859  
both kelvin and rankine were professors at the university
of glasgow, scotland. although the first axioms had been developed, the approach to 
thermodynamics was not considered axiomatic since the method for the development and teaching of
thermodynamic theory was built around the consideration of imaginary cycles and 
the flow of heat
constantin carathedory proposed the first axiomatic approach to thermodynamics in 1909  
unlike previous methods, carathedory s approach was centered on a rigorous mathematical 
formulation of his proposed  second law of thermodynamics   an elementary version of the 
current law that we all have come to know . carathedory s approach is summarized as a 
mathematical reformulation of the work by kelvin and
clausius  6 . the mathematics of his approach was centered
on the geometric behavior of pfaffian differential equations 
and their solutions. although carathedory mathematically formulated the theory of 
thermodynamics, his proposed laws of thermodynamics, like any laws of physics, could not be 
mathematically derived. partially for this reason, carathedory s axiomatic approach was met with 
fierce criticism and it took many years for his approach to 
become as widely accepted as it is today  4 . 
carathedory s original paper states several definitions
and axioms. the definitions will not be discussed in this paper it is assumed that the reader is 
familiar with thermodynamic terminology. carathedory introduces his first axiom regarding the 
variation of internal energy of a multiphase system that experiences external work by an adiabatic process
he then goes on to state his much debated second axiom
axiom ii. in any arbitrary neighborhood of an arbitrarily given initial point there is a state that cannot
be arbitrarily approximated by reversible adiabatic changes of state. 
as would be expected from nature, axiom ii infers that work cannot be fully recovered. it should 
be noted that these two axioms are similar to the first and second laws of thermodynamics. 
carathedory used these two axioms to derive the kelvin temperature scale followed by the usual 
statements of thermodynamic theory  5 . part of what made carathedory s approach so 
revolutionary was that there was no mention of temperature, heat, or entropy. these are all 
derived quantities with heat and entropy appearing once the adiabatic restraint is removed  7 . 
considering energy instead of heat is beneficial from a physical and mathematical point of view since energy is conserved and not heat. the symmetry that is 
maintained by considering these properties allowed carathedory to use the novel methodology based on pfaffian equations  7 . 
carathedory s revolutionary approach wasn t of 
significant interest to the scientific community for over a decade. it was 
in 1921 when m. born wrote three important articles on the axiomatic approach that it caught the attention of the well
known physicists of that time  4 . even then, much
of the scientific community was reluctant to adopt the method and instead 
viewed it as in interesting curiosity. carathedory s approach even brought strong 
criticism, most notably from m. plank. plank criticized carathedory s approach 
for failing to provide a compelling physical picture of the entropy. plank also felt that axiom ii 
was overreaching  4 . in his words,  nobody has tried to reach every neighborhood of any 
equilibrium state by adiabatic steps to determine if they are
gives us no hint which would allow us to differentiate between the inaccessible from the accessible states the mathematical
complexity involved with carathedory s approach also prohibited wide scale adoption  6
many other physicists followed born in an attempt to develop the axiomatic approach to 
thermodynamics. notable authors included buchdahl, pippard, boyling  3 , sears, turner, 
landsberg and even planck many textbooks were also written with different developments 
and different approaches to simplify the mathematics. Others
authors such as laszlo tisza  8 , and later h. callen adopted the 
axiomatic approach but developed it with their own axioms that 
are significantly different. in his 1966 textbook, and again in his 
1970 paper tisza sought to generalize thermodynamics by laying out a different set of 
axioms. when creating his postulates, he took inspiration from statistical mechanics, which had 
been generalized in a similar way  9 . some years later, these alternative axioms were adopted by callen and popularized by his 1985 text
callen and tisza s approach has been referred to as gibbsian thermodynamics since the fundamental equation that it is based 
upon can be traced back to gibbs  11 . thus there are two prominent axiomatic approaches to thermodynamics  gibbsian thermodynamics  and  classical thermodynamics 
based upon carathedory s approach  12 . other approaches were also developed, such as ulises
mouliness  neo gibbsian  formulation, but these were never widely adopted  11
entropy formed a major part of the discussion of thermodynamics. the exact definition of 
entropy used, and the way in which that author wishes to present it affects their choice of 
axioms. in traditional interpretations of thermodynamics
entropy is defined in terms of heat, where the concept of heat is developed from considerations 
based on mechanics  13 . for example, heat has been described as a form of energy related to the 
jiggling motion of atomic particles, thus essentially describing heat as a form of kinetic energy  13 . even tisza  8  argued in
favor of opaque statements such as  heat is motion  by claiming that 
they aid the understanding of the topic. there are 
several problems with these understandings of 
entropy and heat. first, work and heat are not 
stored in a system whereas entropy is. heat and work are simply modes of transfer of energy. second, by using concepts of mechanics to define 
the notion of heat, and in turn using heat to define entropy inherently links entropy to mechanics. this is problematic since entropy defines several results 
about energy availability that contrast with mechanics  13 . however, 
the most important issue is that heat is a mode is a mode of energy  and entropy  transfer between systems that is only valid for systems that are very 
close to equilibrium. even the equation applies only to quasi static  slow, approximately always at equilibrium  processes.
therefore, a definition of entropy that is based on heat is only valid at equilibrium. gyftopoulos and beretta  14  have shown that this definition of entropy 
is unnecessarily restrictive, since entropy is a thermodynamic property that must extend to the non equilibrium
domain. other authors such as lieb disagree, and consider a definition of entropy 
that is strictly tied to equilibrium states to be sufficient  7 . 
in their 2005 textbook  15 , gyftopoulos and beretta highlighted the importance of entropy 
by a definition that does not include heat. it was found that entropy was monotonically related to 
the difference where e is the energy of the system above the lowest energy state  similar to 
exergy, or maximum available work  and is the adiabatic availability of the system  the 
maximum work the system can output in a process that generates no additional effects   15 . it 
was also pointed out by hatsopoulos and keenan  16  that without the second law of 
thermodynamics, heat and work would be indistinguishable. it is one of the most important
discoveries of thermodynamics that this property called entropy, which was first discovered by clausius in 1854  1 , is actuality a property of matter.
with such an abundance of literature, 
it is unfeasible to analyze each approach in detail. modern textbook sales are dominated by well known authors such as moran et al.  17 , cengel and boles  1 , 
and borgnakke and sonntag. the fundamental treatment of the theory 
differs much less between these modern textbooks than it did in the 1960 s  
1980 s when the theory was still being refined. in addition to introducing, explaining 
the axioms used by a range of these textbooks, this essay aims to specifically compare two 
approaches  one old, one new . the examples considered are callen, 1985  10 , moran et al., 2014  
17 , and cengel and boles, the axioms that are discussed in this section were developed from tisza
original alternative axioms  8  9 . callen s purely mathematical formulation that was based on 
his four postulates  axioms  became highly regarded in the scientific community
postulate i. there exist particular states   called equilibrium states   of simple systems that, 
macroscopically, are characterized completely by the internal energy u, the volume v, and the 
mole numbers by observation of nature, it can be concluded that all systems tend to progress towards 
states in which the properties are determined by intrinsic factors, and not by previously enforced 
external constraints these terminal states are time independent by definition. such states are 
called equilibrium states. postulate i leads to the basic problem of thermodynamics 
the single, all encompassing problem of thermodynamics is the determination of the 
equilibrium state that eventually results
after the removal of internal restraints in a closed, composite system
all problems in thermodynamics are, in one way or another, derivatives of this basic problem.
postulate ii. there exists a function   called 
the entropy s   of the extensive parameters of any composite system,
defined for all equilibrium states and having the following property the values assumed by the 
extensive parameters in the absence of an internal constraint are those that maximize the entropy 
over the manifold of constrained equilibrium states
a key point to postulate ii is that it clearly states 
that entropy is defined over equilibrium states but makes no 
reference to non equilibrium states. this subtle choice of wording means that the
thermodynamic theory that is developed is based only around equilibrium positions.
in the absence of constraints, a system is free to settle at any
number of equilibrium positions, each of which will have varying thermodynamic parameters
postulate ii tells us that the selected state will be that which 
maximizes the entropy. this is an introduction to the extremum
principle for equilibrium criterion, which agrees with physical expectations but also simplifies mathematical functions
when calculating the extensive parameters for an equilibrium state, we 
simply select the values that maximize the entropy function. postulate ii 
allows the fundamental relation of a system to be defined by the extensive parameters x
for a single component system, this is given 
in terms of the internal energy u, volume v and number of moles n
it follows that if the fundamental relation of a particular 
system is known then all conceivable thermodynamic information can be obtained from it. the 
fundamental relation fills an integral role in callen s development of classical thermodynamics. 
postulate iii. the entropy of a composite system 
is additive over the constituent subsystems. the entropy is continuous and differentiable and
is a monotonically increasing function of the energy  10 .
several mathematical consequences are derived from postulate iii. the additive property
states that the entropy of a system is the sum of the entropies of the constituent subsystems for spatially separate
subsystems, the additive property requires that the entropy is a homogenous first order function. if the extensive parameters 
of each subsystem were multiplied by a constant lambda, the entropy must also be multiplied by lambda
this is a useful restriction on the fundamental relation. the fact that the entropy must always be an increasing
function of the energy implies that the partial derivative must be positive
the continuity, differentiability and increasing properties of entropy with respect to the energy imply that the fundamental relation can be
inverted to give the energy as a function of the extensive parameters
this is an alternative form of the fundamental relation. we will explore these mathematical consequences in chapter 5. 
postulate iv. the entropy of any system vanishes in the state for which
callen s fourth postulate is not used 
until the end of the text, after most of the theory of thermodynamics has already been developed. 
postulate iv was first formulated in 1907 by walther nernst, stating simply that the entropy 
change in any isothermal process approaches zero as the temperature approaches zero. unlike the 
other three postulates, callen s fourth postulate is very similar to one of the axioms used by the 
majority of other textbooks  2  16 . that axiom is the third law of thermodynamics. 
the significance of nernst s theorem is that it allows the determination of the absolute 
entropy of every substance including elements and compounds, and these entropy values are all 
linked to a common base  1 . the change in entropy of a substance between absolute zero and any 
given state can be determined from precise measurements of energy transfers and specific heat data or from observed molecular data  17 . this is 
particularly convenient for analyzing chemical reactions.
the four postulates are designed to provide the simplest conceivable
formal solution to the basic problem. the rigorous axioms are purely mathematical and make no 
reference to heat, engines or system. this physicist s approach leads to a uniquely elegant 
formulation of thermodynamics  7 .
an issue with callen s approach, as was also pointed out by carathedory s critics  4 , is that 
it fails to provide a compelling physical picture of the entropy. callen s clever introduction of 
entropy as a hypothetical function in postulate ii distracts from this lack of explanation, and 
makes for a smooth and easy to accept introduction of entropy.
differentiation of the fundamental equation 
with consideration of postulate iii leads to pfaffian equations, which are
the same equations that carathedory used to formulate thermodynamics  3 . the mathematical consequences of postulate iii are key to this approach. 
a loophole to callen s postulates is that they make no reference conservation of energy. it is therefore
assumed  that the reader is already aware of this basic axiom. for purposes of 
scientific rigor and completeness, it would have been beneficial for callen to add a postulate v 
that states the conservation of energy. callen may have reasoned that by appending this additional
postulate that is very similar to the first law of thermodynamics, his approach would 
become too similar to other approaches. with the exception of the fourth postulate, callen s 
postulates are each very different from the laws of thermodynamics, which we will now 
introduce since the laws of thermodynamics were 
first invented by clausius and kelvin, many alternative wordings have been suggested. it is 
important to clarify that this discussion of the laws of thermodynamics is primarily based upon 
the fundamentals of engineering, 8th edition  moran et al.   17  and thermodynamics an 
engineering approach, 7th edition  cengel and boles   1 , although reference is also made to other 
textbooks and scientific papers.
zeroth law of thermodynamics. if two 
objects are at thermal equilibrium with a third object, they are in thermal equilibrium with one another  1 . 
the logical content of the zeroth law is 
somewhat trivial. such hypothetical states as described by the zeroth law are assumed to be reached after
a system has been isolated for a sufficient length of time, without the presence of 
adiabatic walls to hinder thermal equilibrium  16 . with the statement of the zeroth law, it is 
implicit that the temperature of the systems is uniform throughout. the zeroth law is thereby 
frequently used to derive temperature. however, it is not until the second law is introduced that 
the measurement  and district zero  of temperature can be defined. 
first law of thermodynamics. the change in internal energy of a
closed system is equal to the net amount of energy transferred into the system across
the system boundary by heat, minus the net amount of energy transferred out of the system boundary by 
thereby, the law requires that no energy 
can be created or destroyed by an isolated system. the first law deals with the amount of energy  
in all of its various forms  that is involved in a process. it does not specify the direction of 
change. the first law does not deny the possibility of impossible processes such as the free flow 
of water uphill or the direct flow of temperature from a cool to a warmer body  1 . this is left to 
the second law of thermodynamics.
many different variations of the first law exist. the equivalence
between equation 4.1 and carathedory s original axiom defined in equation 2.1 should be observed
another interpretation is given by chue  18 , who stated,  
when a system executes a cyclic process, the algebraic sum of the work interaction is 
proportional to the algebraic sum of the heat interaction . chue also presents the law mathematically as
where the integral sign represents a cyclic integral, 
and the symbol is used to indicate that the differential is path dependent  18 . the equivalence 
between equations 4.1 and 4.3 can be shown by considering a cyclic process that starts at state a 
and ends at state a. integration of equation 4.1 across all of the intermediate states will result in
he first law as described by equation 4.1 has been adopted by modern thermodynamics 
textbooks likely because it does not require any differentials, integrals or thermodynamic 
definitions that are difficult to visualize. 
the second law is by far the most heavily debated of the four laws of thermodynamics. 
this is reflected by the fact that moran et al. presents three versions of the second law. the first of 
which is the clausius statement of the second law.
lausius statement of the second law. it is impossible for any system to operate in such a way that 
the sole result would be an energy transfer by heat from a cooler to a hotter body  17 . 
the clausius statement is the most 
intuitive of the three alternative versions of the second law. the words  sole result  are key in this 
statement. heat pumps and refrigerators transfer energy from a cooler to a hotter body but with 
an intermediate process. the clausius statement implies that it is impossible to operate a 
refrigeration cycle without any work input. rudolph clausius used this observation to identify 
entropy as a thermodynamic property  1 .
kelvin planck statement of the second law. it is impossible for any thermodynamic system to 
operate in a thermodynamic cycle and deliver a net amount of energy by work to its surroundings 
while receiving energy by heat transfer from a single thermal reservoir  17 . 
it is important to note that the kelvin planck 
statement does not rule out the possibility of a system developing a net amount of work from a 
single heat source. this would deny a simple piston or a cylinder in an internal combustion 
engine from generating work. the kelvin plank applies only to systems that undergo 
thermodynamic cycles. 
the equivalence of the clausius statement
with the kelvin planck statement is demonstrated by showing that the violation each statement 
implies the violation of the other. figure 1 which shows a hot reservoir, a cool reservoir, and two 
systems is used to demonstrate this equivalence.
the system of the left receives heat from the cold 
reservoir and transmits it to the hot reservoir this is an obvious violation of the clausius 
statement. the second system draws heat from the hot reservoir and emits heat to the cool 
reservoir undergoing a thermodynamic cycle that produces work. this is an acceptable cycle. now 
consider the dotted line that defines the combined 
cycle. the two subsystems and the cold reservoir can be considered a
combined cycle because the cold reservoir and the
system on the left experience no net change in their conditions  17  only the system on
he right undergoes a cycle. the combined system receives net heat from the 
hot reservoir and outputs this is a violation of the kelvin planck statement and thus the equivalence has been proven. similar reasoning can be
used in reverse to demonstrate that a violation of the kelvin planck statement violates the 
clausius statement  17 . this equivalence has been well studied and has been proven by many 
articles  4 cengel and boles use the second law to introduce entropy by stating that energy has both 
quantity and quality the second law is
then used to describe entropy as a property 
that represents the unavailability of a system s thermal energy for conversion into mechanical work. 
entropy is also often described as the degree of disorder or
randomness in the system  1 . moran et al. also chose to present a third statement of the second 
law, one which is based directly on the entropy  17 . this leads to the introduction of entropy as a 
thermodynamic property to the text. 
entropy statement of the second law. it is impossible for any system to operate in a way that entropy is destroyed. 
the entropy statement of the second law is unique 
in that it is the only statement that specifically mentions entropy as a thermodynamic property.
traditionally, the entropy statement is derived from the other statements of the second law
this version of the second law of thermodynamics is more aligned with callen s entropy 
maximum statement  postulate ii
he concept of reversibility is closely related to the second law. a reversible process is one 
where the system and its surroundings can be restored to their respective initial states. the 
clausius and kelvin planck statements of the second law clearly indicate the directions of possible 
changes. it is impossible for any process to counter these directions. thus, if the hypothetical 
reversal of a process is found to contradict the clausius 
or kelvin plank statements of the second law, the process is said to be irreversible. this also applies to the entropy
statement of the second law, where we can deduce that the condition
for a reversible process is one in which no entropy is generated. by analysis of these statements
it is obvious that the transfer of heat between systems with a finite
temperature difference is irreversible, since the reversal of the process 
will violate the clausius statement. similarly, the kelvin plank statement 
tells us that the process of turning work into heat, for example by the brakes of a car, is also irreversible. many textbooks  2  16  18  also
include a formal proof of irreversibility that is discussed in chapter 5. 
countless alternate versions of the second law are given 
in scientific papers and textbooks  3  5  6  7  8 . macdonald 
19  proposed one such alternative in his 1995 paper. his second law stated  it is impossible to transfer
an arbitrarily large amount of heat from a standard heat source with processes 
terminating at a fixed point z   19 , where z is a closed thermodynamical system. using this vague 
statement, macdonald was able to demonstrate that in quasi static processes  19 . 
third law of thermodynamics. the entropy of a pure crystalline substance is zero at the zero of temperature. 
the third law is directly equivalent to callen s postulate fourth postulate. the only difference is 
that the third law also recognizes that there is entropy related to the chemical structure of 
materials. since the two statements are equivalent, the reader is referred to section 3.4 for 
additional discussion of the third law of thermodynamics.
now that the second law has been introduced, it should be noted that it is impossible to 
reach the zero of temperature. for a system to reach zero temperature, it would have to
exchange heat with a cooler body, that is a body which is cooler than 0k which is impossible. another 
method to arrive at this conclusion, which does not
involve the second law, was performed by chue  18 . integrating the definition of entropy from t   0 to an arbitrary t results in
since we know from that third law that s   0 at t   
0. now, considering a process that undergoes a reversible adiabatic process from state a to state b
where c is the heat capacity of the system. to reach the zero of 
temperature, we must require 
it is impossible to make the above integral converge to zero always positive. therefore, tb is not equal to 0 and it is
concluded that it is impossible to 
reach the zero of temperature in a finite number of steps. in other words, no system can ever truly reach zero entropy. 
the modern engineering thermodynamics 
textbook is somewhat of a combination of an advanced version
axiomatic approach with a consideration of engines, cycles, and ideal gases that were the traditional foundations of the engineering approach. one of many 
advantages to this method is that it is easier to follow for students that are new to 
thermodynamics. furthermore, the approach taken by moran et al. is based more upon 
engineering reasoning than callen. in section 4.3, the discussion on the equivalence between the 
clausius statement and the kelvin plank statement involving figure 1 involves engineering 
reasoning that would not be found in callen s text. 
the treatment of heat as a thermodynamic property early on is another interesting 
difference between the two approaches. this is evident in both cengel and boles and moran et al.  
it is interesting to note that in the textbook by moran et al., the theory is developed with 
little reference to equilibrium states  17 . equilibrium states are introduced at the start of the text 
but the important of them is not stressed as it is with callen s approach. this difference can also 
be observed from the axioms used. the 
laws of thermodynamics make no reference to equilibrium 
while the importance of equilibrium states is callen s first postulate. 
a reason for the general omission of equilibrium states may be that moran et al. felt it might confuse the reader.
to explain the necessity for equilibrium states,
a discussion on stability of thermodynamic systems is required  as callen 
includes in chapter 9 . the 
discussion on stability may be too mathematically and logically complex for the casual reader.
now that the axioms have been introduced, explained, and discussed, it is useful to 
understand how they are used to develop some important elements of the theory of 
thermodynamics. classical thermodynamics is developed in its entirety with the use of these few 
axioms. almost every textbook and paper that was published in the mid late 20th century used 
slightly different axioms to develop the
theory by slightly different methods hence there is an abundance of different approaches. for reasons of consistency, this discussion will again 
focus on contrasting the approach used by callen  10  with that of moran et al.  17  and cengel and boles  1 .
alternative axioms lead to an interesting derivation of temperature  10 . from 
postulate i, we have the fundamental equation which describes a system at equilibrium in terms 
of the extensive parameters computing the first differential gives
the partial derivatives in the above equation are the intensive parameters. the following symbols are suggested for each of them  10 
we already know from our analysis of postulate iii that
the partial derivative of entropy with respect to energy   deltas   deltau is a positive quantity  10 . 
therefore, t must also be a positive quantity. to further explore this derivative and prove that  t  
conforms with many of our expectations of temperature, we consider an example which exposes 
several implications of callen s postulates. consider a closed 
composite system consisting of two simple systems separated by a wall that permits the flow of heat but is rigid and impermeable to matter. the volume and mole numbers 
of the two subsystems are thereby fixed, but the internal energies u 1  and u 2  are free to change 
subject to conservation of energy
using postulate iii to add the entropy of the two subsystems
with constant volume and mole numbers, the first derivative becomes
by conservation of energy  equation 1.1 , we have
substituting equation 5.6 and the equation for t into equation 5.5, we have
assuming that the system has come to equilibrium, we know from
postulate ii that the entropy will be at a maximum. any transfer of energy by heat from system 1 
to 2 will be infinitesimally small and assumed quasi static resulting in ds   0. therefore
it is concluded that the condition for equilibrium is that t 1  
this agrees with our notion of temperature.
next, the approach taken by moran et al. and cengel and boles is considered. this 
approach is based upon engineering reasoning. consider two copper blocks and consider that our 
senses tell us that one is warmer than the other  17 .
if the blocks were isolated from their surroundings and brought into contact, heat transfer 
would occur. observable properties such as volume and electrical resistance would
change in the two blocks until they reached a constant. at this point, the copper blocks are said to be in thermal 
equilibrium with each other  17 . considerations such as this lead
us to determine that there must be a physical property that determines whether the two blocks 
are in thermal equilibrium. this property is called the temperature. the zeroth law of thermodynamics is often used in this discussion 
if two objects are each in thermal equilibrium with a thermometer then the two objects must 
be at thermal equilibrium with each other. it is then concluded that the two objects are at the 
same temperature. 
both approaches use the same reasoning
to conclude that the temperature scale must have a definite zero. by considering the carnot efficiency
it is concluded that the ratio of the temperatures   tc   th   must 
be measurable, therefore temperature must be on a set scale with a specific zero  1  10  17 .
the gibbs duhem relation is one of the equations derived in the theory of thermodynamics. 
every textbook has it somewhere, but the method by which it is derived highlights the elegance 
of callen s approach. from postulate iii it is known that the fundamental equation is a first order 
function. in energy form we have  10 
for any constant lambda and extensive parameters xj. differentiating with respect to lambda
for the specific case where lambda   1, equation 5.12 becomes
where pj represents the intensive parameters such as pressure, temperature, and chemical potential. for a single component system, equation 5.13 becomes
equations 5.13 and 5.14 are known as the euler relation. taking infinitesimal variations of equation 5.13, the derivative is
recall equation 5.2. this can be written as
subtracting equation 5.16 from equation 5.15 returns the gibbs duhem relation  10 
for a single component system, this becomes
thus, the equation is derived directly from the postulates with just two steps of differentiation and one subtraction. the gibbs duhem relation
presents the relationship between the intensive parameters in differential form. 
we now consider the approach taken by moran et al. first, the partial molal gibbs function is defined  17 
where ?i is the chemical potential of the ith component. it should be noted that equation 5.19 is just the complete differential of 
the gibbs potential with constant temperature and pressure. this can be re written as
taking the differential
the complete differential of the gibbs function is given by
subtracting equation 5.20 from 5.21 gives the gibbs duhem equation  17 
the equivalence between equation
and equations 5.17 and 5.18 should be observed. callen s method
based directly from his postulates, while moran 
et al. use the definition of the gibbs potential. the second approach requires more
empirical statements, but it may be easier for a reader who is uncomfortable with mathematics.
reversibility  and irreversibility  is a key consideration of thermodynamics with profound effects 
on engineering  1 . an irreversible process leads to the generation of entropy, and a reduction in 
thermodynamic efficiency. callen s postulates lead to a lucid discussion of reversibility. to aid 
this discussion, callen introduces the thermodynamic configuration space  10 . figure 2 shows
system. the surface shown in figure 2 is defined by the fundamental equation of the system 
of postulate i, each point on the configuration space represents 
an equilibrium surface. any point that is not on the surface is not at equilibrium and is therefore 
not defined by the theory of classical thermodynamics. the surface of figure 2 conforms with the 
requirement that deltas requirement that u is a 
single valued function of all extensive parameters is also satisfied. 
the concept of the thermodynamic 
configuration space can be expanded to a composite system by considering the extensive 
parameters of both systems. this is illustrated by figure 4, for one component  k  and another  j   
the entropy for the composite system is now plotted as a function of extensive parameters of 
the two subsystems. 
the arbitrary curve drawn on the 
hyper surface of figure 4 represents a quasi static process from state a to state h. a quasi static 
process is one that can be formed from a dense succession of equilibrium states  10 . real 
processes involve deviations from equilibrium which cannot be represented by the 
thermodynamic configuration space. the quasi static process 
drawn in figure 4 can be considered an approximation of
a real process. for example, after departing state a, the system
disappears from the surface before reappearing at state b. the identification of t ds as heat transfer and ?p dv as work are based upon quasi static processes 
14 . according to the entropy maximum statement 
postulate ii , all such processes must proceed in a direction that maximizes entropy  10 . the 
process drawn in figure 4 is irreversible because for
the process to travel in reverse linking state h to state a would require a reduction in entropy. such process would violate postulate ii.
a quasi static process in which the increase in entropy becomes vanishingly small is 
known as a reversible process  10 . such a process is illustrated in figure 5. the process is free to 
reverse from state b to state a without violating postulate ii. the fundamental equation  postulate i  
combined with the entropy maximum statement 
postulate ii  logically leads to the creation of these thermodynamic configuration spaces that are especially easy to visualize.
the approach to defining reversibility taken by
cengel and boles and by moran et al. follows reasoning from the second law of thermodynamics. 
this is discussed in chapter 4.3
callen s postulates lead to a physicist s 
approach to thermodynamics. the formulation is very elegant but it requires a strong 
mathematical background. callen succeeds in making the thermodynamic theory seem very 
simple. almost the entire theory can be derived by taking the postulated fundamental equation, 
and performing operations of differentiation and simple substitutions. a student who is taking 
their second course in thermodynamics will gain most out of reading callen s approach since they 
are already familiar with the basics. callen s text will increase their understanding of the origins  
and hence overall understanding  of equations. 
the modern engineering textbooks 
such as moran et al. and cengel and boles are more intuitive. for example, when following a 
derivation, variables are constantly linked to physical properties instead left in their differential 
form. this is easier to follow for the casual student.
a striking difference between the new textbooks  1  15  17  and the 
older textbooks  2  8  10  16  18  is that the new texts include many more examples and 
problems. the older texts such as callen focus more on derivations and understanding. the 
learning benefit of this depends on the reader. specific students will learn best by following 
examples while others will appreciate hypothetical reasoning. certainly however, the multitude 
of examples given in cengel and boles and moran et al.
will enhance the readers understanding of engineering thermodynamics. this is a problem with 
callen s text. the reader can greatly increase their understanding of the theory of thermodynamics 
but learn little about engineering problems.
a problem with the modern engineering
textbooks  1  17  is that they have attempted 
to become all encompassing. by defining an excessive number of equations and symbols
they succeed in over complicating basic concepts. furthermore, excessive cross referencing to these 
equations makes reading the text arduous and confusing.
an example of this is in chapter 7 of moran et al., where different equations were defined for 
exergy, exergy difference, and specific flow exergy. each equation comes with new notation, resulting in an overwhelming number of equations and symbols
for something that is a relatively simple concept. it would be sufficient
to define the equation for exergy and leave it up to the reader to take the simple steps to
derive the other non essential equations. there is no doubt that some students will 
find these additional equations and examples useful as a thermodynamic reference text. however, 
it is easier to understand the thermodynamic theory when the unnecessary information has been 
stripped out. throughout this report, information has been sourced solely from textbooks and peer 
reviewed articles. due to the abundance of 
material available, the sources selected were among the best selling and most cited. 
additional citations will, in most cases, give additional validation to the sources. it is concluded 
the potential for error from the sources used in this paper is minimal at most. 
since the objective of this report is 
somewhat subjective, author bias is 
highlighted as the main source of potential error. the author s personal feelings and preferences 
may have translated into writing when the evidence suggests otherwise. 
after a review of the origins of axiomatic 
approaches to thermodynamics, two different axiomatic approaches were selected for 
comparison. these were callen s approach to  gibbsian thermodynamics  and moran et al. and 
cengel and boles s modern engineering approach to classical thermodynamics. the axioms used 
in each of these approaches were analyzed at length. then, the axioms and the way that they lead 
to the development of the theory of thermodynamics were then compared.
callen s four simple postulates 
lead to a uniquely elegant formulation of classical thermodynamics. the postulates themselves 
are designed to permit a rigorous mathematical derivation. entropy is cleverly defined by 
postulate ii, leading to a definition that is independent of the notion of heat. a possible loophole 
arises from the omission of the principle of conservation of energy from the postulates. 
the modern engineering thermodynamics 
textbook such as cengel and boles  1  and moran et al.  17  is somewhat of a combination of an
advanced version carathedory s axiomatic approach with a consideration of 
engines, cycles, and ideal gases that were the traditional foundations of the engineering 
approach. the axioms used are the familiar 0th 3rd laws of thermodynamics. these axioms are 
easily understood, but the notion of 
equilibrium states is missing from the four laws. furthermore, entropy is defined by
a discussion of heat which unnecessarily restricts entropy to equilibrium states. 
the two sets of axioms lead to very different derivations of the temperature scale, the 
gibbs duhem equation, and the discussion of reversibility. both approaches have advantages and 
disadvantages for their capacity to make
thermodynamics understandable. it is argued that callen s textbook is better suited for a student 
who already has basic knowledge of thermodynamics, and that callen s text is best for learning 
about the theory of thermodynamics. the modern engineering textbooks will be better for a 
student who is new to thermodynamics, and with the
additional example, they are more apt to make applied engineering thermodynamics understandable.
a recommendation for future study is to compare two older, and both purely axiomatic 
textbooks such as callen  10  and hatsopoulos and keenan 
16 . alternatively, one could compare two modern approaches such as moran et al.  17  with 
gyftopoulos and beretta  15 . comparing two textbooks that were published at a similar time 
period and that were written to appeal to the same audience would result in a discussion that is 
solely focused on the fundamental axioms.
